docs/source/gettingstarted.rst, before:

Getting started
================

Apply for an account
--------------------
TBC

Login to the user inteface
-------------------------
cld-ter-ui-01.pd.infn.it is the node configured as user interface. Use ssh to connect to
this cluster with the credentials that you have been given:

::

   ssh <username>@cld-ter-ui-01.pd.infn.it

   
From this node you can submit batch jobs and or launch interactive jobs..

.. NOTE ::
   
   Please note that you can't run jobs on the user interface node.


Manage your application software
--------------------------------
If the software that you need is not installed in the cluster and it
is not available through CVMFS, 
you can install it
and make it available through a relevant environment module. Documentation is available in 
:ref:`Application software<appsw>`.

Another possible option is installing your software inside a container.

     
Submit a batch job
------------------
Once you have your compiled program and prepared its input data,
you can submit the batch job on the cluster's compute nodes.

This is a simple bash script to submit a batch job:

::

   #!/bin/sh
   #SBATCH --nodes=2 # Number of nodes
   #SBATCH --ntasks-per-node=200 # Number of tasks per node
   #SBATCH --mem=20G # Total memory requested per node
   #SBATCH --time=01:00:00 # Time limit (1 hour in this example)
   #SBATCH --partition onlycpus
   #SBATCH --qos fast
   #SBATCH --output=/shared/home/<username>/JOB.out
   #SBATCH --error=/shared/home/<username>/JOB.err
   #SBATCH --mail-type=ALL # Notify via email about all job events
   #SBATCH --mail-user=<email-address>
   srun /shared/home/<username>/<my-app>

In this script we specified:

* the needed resources for this job (--nodes, --ntasks-per-node and --mem)
* The partition and the QOS to be used for this job (--partition and --qos)  
* The maximum wallclocktime for this job (--time)
* The standard output and error (--output and --error)
* Who to be notified via e-mail and the relevant events (--mail-user and --mail-type)
* The program to be executed (<my-app>)  

To submit the job:

::

  > sbatch [opts] <job_script>


The main user's commands of SLURM are reported in the table below.  Please
consult the man pages for more information.

+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Command                   | Description                                         |
+===========================+=====================================================+
| sbatch <batch script>	    | Submits a batch script to the queue                 |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| squeue                    | Lists jobs in the queue                             | 
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| sinfo	                    | Prints queue information about nodes and partitions |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| scancel <jobid>           | Cancels a job from the queue                        |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| scontrol show job <jobid> | Displays detailed information for a job             |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| sprio	                    | Displays information about scheduling priority      |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| seff <jobid>              | Checks the efficiency for a completed job           |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+

  

Run an interactive job
-----------------------

Using `salloc`, you allocate resources and spawn a shell that can be used to execute parallel
tasks.

Once the allocation is made, the salloc command starts a shell on the login node.
You can then start parallel execution on the allocated nodes with `srun`.

Example:

::
   
   [<username>@cld-ter-ui-01 ~]$ salloc --nodes 2 --ntasks-per-node=4 --time 00:10:00
   salloc: Granted job allocation 704
   salloc: Nodes cld-ter-[01-02] are ready for job
   
   bash-5.1$ srun ./hello
   Hello world from processor cld-ter-01.cloud.pd.infn.it, rank 0 out of 1 processors
   Hello world from processor cld-ter-02.cloud.pd.infn.it, rank 0 out of 1 processors
   Hello world from processor cld-ter-02.cloud.pd.infn.it, rank 0 out of 1 processors
   Hello world from processor cld-ter-01.cloud.pd.infn.it, rank 0 out of 1 processors
   Hello world from processor cld-ter-01.cloud.pd.infn.it, rank 0 out of 1 processors
   Hello world from processor cld-ter-01.cloud.pd.infn.it, rank 0 out of 1 processors
   Hello world from processor cld-ter-02.cloud.pd.infn.it, rank 0 out of 1 processors
   Hello world from processor cld-ter-02.cloud.pd.infn.it, rank 0 out of 1 processors
   bash-5.1$ 
   bash-5.1$ exit
   exit
   salloc: Relinquishing job allocation 704
   [<username>@cld-ter-ui-01 ~]$ 


.. NOTE ::
   
   Please remember to close the interactive job with the command `exit` when you have
   finished, in order not to waste resources.


Manage containerized applications
---------------------------------
You can also manage containerized applications using SLURM.
For this cluster we provide apptainer (previously known as singularity) as
framework to run such applications.

The following is a simple example that run a container (myexample.sif) using
apptainer:

::

  #!/bin/sh
  #SBATCH --output=/shared/home/<username>/JOB.out
  #SBATCH --error=/shared/home/<username>/JOB.err
  #SBATCH --ntasks=2
  #SBATCH --mem=20G
  #SBATCH --mail-type=ALL
  #SBATCH --mail-user<email-address>
  cd $TMP_DIR
  srun apptainer run /shared/home/<username>/myexample.sif



More information about apptainer is available at the `Apptainer home page <https://apptainer.org/>`__.


More information
----------------

Please refer to the `SLURM
official documentation <https://slurm.schedmd.com/>`__ to have all the needed information
about SLURM usage.



Getting help
------------
TBC

Commit message:

support contact and other minor changes

docs/source/gettingstarted.rst, after:

Getting started
================
.. WARNING::

   The HPC cluster is not yet in production.
   For the time being we are giving access to this facility only to a limited
   set of beta testers.


Apply for an account
--------------------

Please contact support AT cloudveneto.it for an account on the HPC cluster.
In the request please specify:

* your institution
* your role in this institution  
* a description of the experiment/use case/project for which you need such HPC
  resources
* the estimated needed resources


Login to the user inteface
-------------------------
cld-ter-ui-01.pd.infn.it is the node configured as user interface. Use ssh to connect to
this cluster with the credentials that you have been given:

::

   ssh <username>@cld-ter-ui-01.pd.infn.it

   
From this node you can submit batch jobs and or launch interactive jobs..

.. NOTE ::
   
   Please note that you can't run jobs on the user interface node.


Manage your application software
--------------------------------
If the software that you need is not installed in the cluster and it
is not available through CVMFS, 
you can install it
and make it available through a relevant environment module. Documentation is available in 
:ref:`Application software<appsw>`.

Another possible option is installing your software inside a container.

     
Submit a batch job
------------------
Once you have your compiled program and prepared its input data,
you can submit the batch job on the cluster's compute nodes.

This is a simple bash script to submit a batch job:

::

   #!/bin/sh
   #SBATCH --nodes=2 # Number of nodes
   #SBATCH --ntasks-per-node=200 # Number of tasks per node
   #SBATCH --mem=20G # Total memory requested per node
   #SBATCH --time=01:00:00 # Time limit (1 hour in this example)
   #SBATCH --partition onlycpus
   #SBATCH --qos fast
   #SBATCH --output=/shared/home/<username>/JOB.out
   #SBATCH --error=/shared/home/<username>/JOB.err
   #SBATCH --mail-type=ALL # Notify via email about all job events
   #SBATCH --mail-user=<email-address>
   srun /shared/home/<username>/<my-app>

In this script we specified:

* the needed resources for this job (--nodes, --ntasks-per-node and --mem)
* The partition and the QOS to be used for this job (--partition and --qos)  
* The maximum wallclocktime for this job (--time)
* The standard output and error (--output and --error)
* Who to be notified via e-mail and the relevant events (--mail-user and --mail-type)
* The program to be executed (<my-app>)  

To submit the job:

::

  > sbatch [opts] <job_script>


The main user's commands of SLURM are reported in the table below.  Please
consult the man pages for more information.

+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Command                   | Description                                         |
+===========================+=====================================================+
| sbatch <batch script>	    | Submits a batch script to the queue                 |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| squeue                    | Lists jobs in the queue                             | 
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| sinfo	                    | Prints queue information about nodes and partitions |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| scancel <jobid>           | Cancels a job from the queue                        |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| scontrol show job <jobid> | Displays detailed information for a job             |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| sprio	                    | Displays information about scheduling priority      |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| seff <jobid>              | Checks the efficiency for a completed job           |
+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+

  

Run an interactive job
-----------------------

Using `salloc`, you allocate resources and spawn a shell that can be used to execute parallel
tasks.

Once the allocation is made, the salloc command starts a shell on the login node.
You can then start parallel execution on the allocated nodes with `srun`.

Example:

::
   
   [<username>@cld-ter-ui-01 ~]$ salloc --nodes 2 --ntasks-per-node=4 --time 00:10:00
   salloc: Granted job allocation 704
   salloc: Nodes cld-ter-[01-02] are ready for job
   
   bash-5.1$ srun ./hello
   Hello world from processor cld-ter-01.cloud.pd.infn.it, rank 0 out of 1 processors
   Hello world from processor cld-ter-02.cloud.pd.infn.it, rank 0 out of 1 processors
   Hello world from processor cld-ter-02.cloud.pd.infn.it, rank 0 out of 1 processors
   Hello world from processor cld-ter-01.cloud.pd.infn.it, rank 0 out of 1 processors
   Hello world from processor cld-ter-01.cloud.pd.infn.it, rank 0 out of 1 processors
   Hello world from processor cld-ter-01.cloud.pd.infn.it, rank 0 out of 1 processors
   Hello world from processor cld-ter-02.cloud.pd.infn.it, rank 0 out of 1 processors
   Hello world from processor cld-ter-02.cloud.pd.infn.it, rank 0 out of 1 processors
   bash-5.1$ 
   bash-5.1$ exit
   exit
   salloc: Relinquishing job allocation 704
   [<username>@cld-ter-ui-01 ~]$ 


.. NOTE ::
   
   Please remember to close the interactive job with the command `exit` when you have
   finished, in order not to waste resources.


Manage containerized applications
---------------------------------
You can also manage containerized applications using SLURM.
For this cluster we provide apptainer (previously known as singularity) as
framework to run such applications.

The following is a simple example that run a container (myexample.sif) using
apptainer:

::

  #!/bin/sh
  #SBATCH --output=/shared/home/<username>/JOB.out
  #SBATCH --error=/shared/home/<username>/JOB.err
  #SBATCH --ntasks=2
  #SBATCH --mem=20G
  #SBATCH --mail-type=ALL
  #SBATCH --mail-user<email-address>
  cd $TMP_DIR
  srun apptainer run /shared/home/<username>/myexample.sif



More information about apptainer is available at the `Apptainer home page <https://apptainer.org/>`__.


More information
----------------

Please refer to the `SLURM
official documentation <https://slurm.schedmd.com/>`__ to have all the needed information
about SLURM usage.



Getting help
------------

For the time being please contact support AT cloudveneto.it for support
request. A dedicated HPC support mailing list will likely be created in the
future.
